- [Basics](#basics)
- [English Grammar](#english-grammar)
    - [Parts of Speech](#parts-of-speech)
    - [Sentence Structure](#sentence-structure)
      - [Subject and Predicate](#subject-and-predicate)
      - [Types of Sentences](#types-of-sentences)
    - [Tenses](#tenses)
    - [Subject-Verb Agreement](#subject-verb-agreement)
    - [Modifiers](#modifiers)
    - [Punctuation](#punctuation)
    - [Common Errors](#common-errors)
  - [Tense, Aspect, and Mood (TAM)](#tense-aspect-and-mood-tam)
    - [1. Tense {#tense .unnumbered}](#1-tense-tense-unnumbered)
    - [2. Aspect {#aspect .unnumbered}](#2-aspect-aspect-unnumbered)
    - [3. Mood {#mood .unnumbered}](#3-mood-mood-unnumbered)
    - [Interaction with Number, Person, and Gender {#interaction-with-number-person-and-gender .unnumbered}](#interaction-with-number-person-and-gender-interaction-with-number-person-and-gender-unnumbered)
  - [Manipulations](#manipulations)
  - [Tenses](#tenses-1)
    - [Simple \& Perfect Tenses](#simple--perfect-tenses)
- [Parts of Speech](#parts-of-speech-1)
  - [Misc](#misc)
  - [Nouns](#nouns)
    - [Definitions:](#definitions)
    - [Properties](#properties)
  - [Pronouns](#pronouns)
  - [Verbs](#verbs)
    - [Conjugation](#conjugation)
    - [Types (nature)](#types-nature)
      - [Verbals](#verbals)
      - [Infinitive](#infinitive)
      - [Gerunds](#gerunds)
      - [Participles](#participles)
      - [Phrasal verbs](#phrasal-verbs)
    - [Types (meaning)](#types-meaning)
      - [Attribution verbs](#attribution-verbs)
  - [idioms](#idioms)
  - [Particles](#particles)
  - [Prepositions](#prepositions)
  - [Adverbs](#adverbs)
  - [Adjectives](#adjectives)
  - [Conjuctions](#conjuctions)
  - [Connectives](#connectives)
  - [Sequences](#sequences)
  - [Interjection](#interjection)
  - [Modifiers: Are All Modifiers Adverbs?](#modifiers-are-all-modifiers-adverbs)
    - [Adjectives as Modifiers](#adjectives-as-modifiers)
      - [Examples of Adjectives Modifying Nouns:](#examples-of-adjectives-modifying-nouns)
    - [Adverbs as Modifiers](#adverbs-as-modifiers)
      - [Examples of Adverbs Modifying Verbs:](#examples-of-adverbs-modifying-verbs)
      - [Examples of Adverbs Modifying Adjectives:](#examples-of-adverbs-modifying-adjectives)
      - [Examples of Adverbs Modifying Other Adverbs:](#examples-of-adverbs-modifying-other-adverbs)
    - [Are All Modifiers Adverbs?](#are-all-modifiers-adverbs)
      - [Key Differences Between Adjectives and Adverbs as Modifiers:](#key-differences-between-adjectives-and-adverbs-as-modifiers)
    - [Conclusion](#conclusion)
  - [References:](#references)
    - [Books](#books)
    - [Websites](#websites)


# Basics

-   A conjunction is a word or words used to show the relationship
    between one notion and another notion. There are two main types of
    conjunction: the coordinative conjunction, which joins phrases of
    equal importance and rank, and the subordinative conjunction, which
    joins a phrase with another phrase that is dependent on it.

-   An adverb is a word added to a verb, a participle, an adjective, or
    another adverb; and generally expresses time, place, degree, or
    manner

    Adverbs can modify a verb, a clause, adjective or a phrase

# English Grammar

English grammar refers to the set of rules and conventions that govern
the structure of sentences, phrases, and words in the English language.
It encompasses several key areas:

### Parts of Speech

-   **Nouns:** Words that name people, places, things, or ideas (e.g.,
    *dog*, *happiness*).

-   **Pronouns:** Words that replace nouns (e.g., *he*, *they*).

-   **Verbs:** Words that express actions or states of being (e.g.,
    *run*, *is*).

-   **Adjectives:** Words that describe nouns (e.g., *beautiful*,
    *red*).

-   **Adverbs:** Words that describe verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs
    (e.g., *quickly*, *very*).

-   **Prepositions:** Words that show relationships between nouns and
    other words (e.g., *on*, *under*).

-   **Conjunctions:** Words that connect clauses, sentences, or words
    (e.g., *and*, *but*).

-   **Interjections:** Words or phrases expressing emotion or
    exclamation (e.g., *oh!*, *wow!*).

### Sentence Structure

Every sentence in English follows a general structure. This can be
broken down into different components.

#### Subject and Predicate

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/sentences/predicate/#:~:text=What%20is%20a%20compound%20predicate%3F>
Every sentence has a **subject** (what or who the sentence is about) and
a **predicate** (what the subject does or is).

#### Types of Sentences

-   **Simple Sentences:** Contain one independent clause.

-   **Compound Sentences:** Contain two or more independent clauses
    connected by conjunctions.

-   **Complex Sentences:** Contain one independent clause and one or
    more dependent clauses.

-   **Compound-Complex Sentences:** Contain at least two independent
    clauses and one or more dependent clauses.

### Tenses

Tenses indicate the time of an action. There are three main tenses, with
multiple variations:

-   **Past:** Actions completed in the past (e.g., *I walked*).

-   **Present:** Actions happening now or general truths (e.g., *I
    walk*).

-   **Future:** Actions that will happen (e.g., *I will walk*).

Each tense can also take forms like simple, continuous, perfect, and
perfect continuous.

### Subject-Verb Agreement

In English, the subject and verb must agree in number and person:

-   *He runs* (singular subject, singular verb).

-   *They run* (plural subject, plural verb).

### Modifiers

Modifiers are words or phrases that provide additional information. The
placement of modifiers matters:

-   *The fast runner won.* (The adjective *fast* modifies the noun
    *runner*.)

-   *He only eats vegetables.* (The adverb *only* modifies the verb
    *eats*.)

-   *He eats only vegetables.* (Here, *only* modifies *vegetables*.)

### Punctuation

Punctuation marks help clarify meaning and separate ideas:

-   **Period (.):** Ends declarative sentences.

-   **Comma (,):** Separates elements in a list, clauses, or phrases.

-   **Apostrophe ('):** Indicates possession or contractions.

-   **Quotation Marks (\"):** Enclose direct speech or quotes.

-   **Colon (:)** and **Semicolon (;):** Link related ideas or separate
    complex items.

### Common Errors

Here are some common grammar mistakes to watch for:

-   **Run-on Sentences:** Two independent clauses joined incorrectly.

-   **Sentence Fragments:** Incomplete sentences.

-   **Misplaced Modifiers:** Modifiers placed ambiguously.

-   **Homophones:** Words that sound the same but differ in meaning or
    spelling (e.g., *their* vs. *there*).

## Tense, Aspect, and Mood (TAM)

TAM stands for **Tense, Aspect, and Mood**, which are grammatical
categories used to convey different layers of meaning about a verb in a
sentence. Here's a breakdown of each component:

### 1. Tense {#tense .unnumbered}

Indicates *when* an action takes place---past, present, or future.

-   Example: *She runs* (present), *She ran* (past), *She will run*
    (future).

### 2. Aspect {#aspect .unnumbered}

Describes the *nature or structure* of the action, such as whether it is
completed, ongoing, habitual, or momentary. Common aspects include:

-   **Perfect**: Completed action (*She has run*).

-   **Progressive**: Ongoing action (*She is running*).

-   **Habitual**: Repeated action (*She runs every day*).

-   **Perfective**: A single, completed event (*She ran to the store*).

### 3. Mood {#mood .unnumbered}

Expresses the speaker's attitude or the degree of certainty about the
action. Common moods are:

-   **Indicative**: Factual or declarative statements (*She runs*).

-   **Subjunctive**: Hypothetical or desired situations (*If she were to
    run*).

-   **Imperative**: Commands (*Run!*).

-   **Conditional**: Actions dependent on conditions (*She would run if
    it stopped raining*).

### Interaction with Number, Person, and Gender {#interaction-with-number-person-and-gender .unnumbered}

In some languages, TAM is marked alongside grammatical categories like
**number**, **person**, and **gender**. These grammatical features
specify additional information about the subject of the verb:

-   **Number**: Whether the subject is singular or plural (*I run* vs.
    *We run*).

-   **Person**: Whether the subject is first (*I*), second (*you*), or
    third person (*he/she/it/they*).

-   **Gender**: In languages like Arabic or French, verbs may agree with
    the subject's gender (*Il court* for \"he runs\" vs. *Elle court*
    for \"she runs\").

Thus, while TAM deals with temporal and qualitative aspects of the verb,
its forms may vary to align with these grammatical categories depending
on the language.

## Manipulations

INFLECTION is used as a general term that includes the CONJUGATION of
verbs and the DECLENSION of nouns, pronouns and adjectives.

## Tenses

### Simple & Perfect Tenses

**[\[Reference\]](https://promova.com/english-grammar/perfect-vs-simple-tenses-in-english)**

The perfect tense expresses completed actions; the simple tense
describes ongoing or imminent actions. Perfect tenses differ from past
tenses by indicating ongoing relevance or recent completion.

The perfect and simple tenses are the two main types of tenses used in
English. The other tenses in English, such as the future and the
conditional, are formed using the perfect and simple tenses.

# Parts of Speech

## Misc

Pronouns

pronoun case structure

parallelism

sentence fragments/run-ons

adverbs, including modifiers and comparatives

verb tenses and regular and irregular verb forms

Subordination/coordination

## Nouns

**[\[ref\]](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/English_Grammar/Basic_Parts_of_Speech/Nouns)**

### Definitions:

-   Noun: any idea, quality, person, place or thing.

-   Common noun: any nonspecific person, place or thing.

-   Proper noun: any specific person, place, living being, or thing.

-   Countable noun

-   Uncountable noun or Mass noun

-   Concrete noun

-   Abstract noun

-   Collective noun: a collection of a specific type of elements

-   Compound noun: made up of two or more words forming a unit idea.

### Properties

1.  Person

2.  Number

3.  Gender

    -   Masculine

    -   Feminine

    -   common

    -   neuter

4.  Case

    -   Nominative

        nominative case can be either a subject or predicate but not
        both in a sentence.

    -   Objective

        can be used as object of the verb or object of the preposition

    -   Possessive

        usually formed by adding an apostrophe (') or an apostrophe s
        ('s)

## Pronouns

A pronoun replaces a noun in a sentence. The noun that is replaced is
called an antecedent.

## Verbs

References:

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/parts-of-speech/verb-tenses/>

A verb is a word or group of words expressing an action or a state.

### Conjugation

A verb form[]{#Verbs!verb form label="Verbs!verb form"} is a way in
which a verb is shaped or modified in order to suit the context that
speaks about an action that is performed at a specific time.

Types:

-   root verb

-   third person singular present form of verb

-   present participle

-   simple past participle

-   past participle

### Types (nature)

-   transitive and intransitive verbs

    <https://www.grammarly.com/blog/parts-of-speech/transitive-and-intransitive-verbs/>

#### Verbals

A verbal (is a form of a verb or is a derivation from a verb ) that
functions as some other part of speech in a sentence

#### Infinitive

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/infinitives/>

the basic form of a verb, without an inflection binding it to a
particular subject or tense

#### Gerunds

Gerunds are nouns built from a verb with an ing suffix.

Uses:

-   subject of a sentence

-   an object

-   an object of preposition

-   to complement a subject.

#### Participles

Participles are forms of verbs which are used as adjectives.

Structure:

::: {#tab:tenses}
  **Tense**      **Inflection**                  **Typical Meaning**
  -------------- ------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  Present         root + ing                     Continuance of the being, action, or passion
  Past            root + ed/en                   Completion of the being, action, or passion
  Past Perfect    had/having + past participle   Previous completion of the being, action, or passion
:::

[]{#tab:tenses label="tab:tenses"}

#### Phrasal verbs

References:
<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/parts-of-speech/common-phrasal-verbs/>

A preposition is a word used to express some relation of different
things or thoughts to each other, and is generally placed before a noun
or a pronoun

### Types (meaning)

#### Attribution verbs

Used in signal phrases for:
- Presenting
- Suggesting
- Arguing
- Advising

## idioms

An idiom is a phrase that, when taken as a whole, has a meaning you
wouldn't be able to deduce from the meanings of the individual words.

Types:

-   Pure idiom

-   Binomial idiom

-   Partial idiom

-   Prepositional idiom

## Particles

Word that does not change its form through inflection and does not fit
easily into the established system of parts of speech.

## Prepositions

A preposition is a word or group of words used before a noun, pronoun,
or noun phrase to show direction, time, place, location, spatial
relationships, or to introduce an object.

\"The paper lies before me on the desk.\"

In that sentence, before is the preposition, me is the governed term of
a preposition, \"before me\" is a prepositional phrase, and the verb
lies is the prior term of a preposition. \"On the desk\" is the other
prepositional phrase, and lies is its prior term.

To a preposition, the prior term may be a noun, an adjective, a pronoun,
a verb, a participle, or an adverb; and the governed term may be a noun,
a pronoun, a pronominal adjective, an infinitive verb, or a participle.

## Adverbs

An adverb is a word added to a verb, a participle, an adjective, or
another adverb; and generally expresses time, place, degree, or manner:
as,

\"They are now here, studying very diligently.\"

Adverbs can modify a verb, a clause, adjective or a phrase.

## Adjectives

An adjective is a part of speech used as a modifier that describes a
noun or pronoun.

## Conjuctions

A conjunction is a word used to connect words or sentences in
construction, and to show the dependence of the terms so connected

-   copulative conjunction is a conjunction that denotes an addition, a
    cause, a consequence, or a supposition

-   disjunctive conjunction is a conjunction that denotes opposition of
    meaning

-   corresponsive conjunctions are those which are used in pairs, so
    that one refers or answers to the other.

  copulative   disjunctive       corresponsive
  ------------ ----------------- ---------------
  and          although          and; as
  as           but               as; as
  because      either            both
  both         except            nor; whether
  even         lest              or; neither
  for          neither           or; though
  if           nor               so; if
  seeing       notwithstanding   then; either
  since        or                yet
  so           provided          yet; although
  that         save               
  then         than               
               though             
               unless             
               whereas            
               whether            
               yet                

## Connectives

## Sequences

## Interjection

An interjection is a word or group of words that is used to express
surprise, fear, pain or other emotions. It is not grammatically related
to other words in a sentence, so it functions independently. It may be
followed by an exclamation point, or a comma when part of a complete
sentence.

## Modifiers: Are All Modifiers Adverbs?

Modifiers are words or phrases that provide additional information about
other words in a sentence. They can describe, limit, or qualify the
meaning of the words they modify. While many modifiers are adverbs, not
all modifiers are adverbs. Modifiers can be broadly classified into two
types: adjectives and adverbs, depending on what they modify.

### Adjectives as Modifiers

Adjectives are words that modify or describe nouns (people, places,
things, or ideas). They provide additional information about a noun,
such as its quality, quantity, or state.

#### Examples of Adjectives Modifying Nouns:

-   **The *blue* sky** (The adjective *blue* modifies the noun *sky*.)

-   **She wore a *beautiful* dress** (The adjective *beautiful* modifies
    the noun *dress*.)

-   **It was a *long* journey** (The adjective *long* modifies the noun
    *journey*.)

In these examples, the adjectives give us more information about the
nouns they modify.

### Adverbs as Modifiers

Adverbs, on the other hand, modify verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs.
They describe how, when, where, or to what extent an action occurs, or
they provide more information about the adjective or adverb they modify.

#### Examples of Adverbs Modifying Verbs:

-   **She sings *beautifully*.** (The adverb *beautifully* modifies the
    verb *sings*.)

-   **He runs *quickly*.** (The adverb *quickly* modifies the verb
    *runs*.)

-   **They worked *hard* yesterday.** (The adverb *hard* modifies the
    verb *worked*.)

#### Examples of Adverbs Modifying Adjectives:

-   **She is *very* talented.** (The adverb *very* modifies the
    adjective *talented*.)

-   **The movie was *incredibly* boring.** (The adverb *incredibly*
    modifies the adjective *boring*.)

-   **He is *extremely* tired.** (The adverb *extremely* modifies the
    adjective *tired*.)

#### Examples of Adverbs Modifying Other Adverbs:

-   **She sings *quite* beautifully.** (The adverb *quite* modifies the
    adverb *beautifully*.)

-   **He runs *too* quickly.** (The adverb *too* modifies the adverb
    *quickly*.)

-   **They worked *very* hard.** (The adverb *very* modifies the adverb
    *hard*.)

### Are All Modifiers Adverbs?

No, not all modifiers are adverbs. While adverbs modify verbs,
adjectives, and other adverbs, adjectives are also modifiers, but they
modify nouns. In addition to adjectives and adverbs, other modifiers can
include determiners and phrases that provide additional details about
nouns or actions.

#### Key Differences Between Adjectives and Adverbs as Modifiers:

-   **Adjectives modify nouns.** They provide more information about the
    characteristics or qualities of a noun.

-   **Adverbs modify verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs.** They provide
    more information about the manner, time, degree, or frequency of an
    action, or they describe the intensity of a quality or another
    adverb.

For example:

-   **Adjective:** *The *blue* sky is beautiful.* (The adjective *blue*
    modifies the noun *sky*.)

-   **Adverb:** *She sings *beautifully*.* (The adverb *beautifully*
    modifies the verb *sings*.)

### Conclusion

Modifiers play an essential role in the English language by adding
detail and enhancing meaning. While many modifiers are adverbs,
adjectives are also crucial modifiers that provide essential information
about nouns. Understanding the distinction between these types of
modifiers is important for constructing clear and accurate sentences.

## References:

### Books

[English in Use](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/English_in_Use)

### Websites

- Grammarly
- owl perdue edu 
