- [Words, Phrases \& Clauses](#words-phrases--clauses)
  - [Compound words](#compound-words)
  - [Signal Phrases](#signal-phrases)
    - [Uses](#uses)
- [Sentences](#sentences)
  - [Proving a sentence is grammatically correct](#proving-a-sentence-is-grammatically-correct)
  - [Specific elements of sentences](#specific-elements-of-sentences)
    - [Phrases](#phrases)
    - [Clauses](#clauses)
    - [Predicate](#predicate)
    - [Subject Complements](#subject-complements)
      - [Object](#object)
  - [Forms](#forms)
  - [Types](#types)
  - [Phrases](#phrases-1)
    - [Grammatical Phrases](#grammatical-phrases)
      - [Appositive phrases](#appositive-phrases)
    - [Common Phrases](#common-phrases)
  - [Clauses](#clauses-1)
  - [Structure](#structure)
      - [Basic Rules](#basic-rules)
  - [Punctuation](#punctuation)
    - [Period](#period)
    - [Comma](#comma)
    - [Apostrophe (')](#apostrophe-)
    - [Ellipses (. . .)](#ellipses---)
  - [Proofreading](#proofreading)
    - [Tips](#tips)
  - [Subject \& Object](#subject--object)
  - [Subject-Verb Agreement](#subject-verb-agreement)
  - [Grammatical Structures in English](#grammatical-structures-in-english)
    - [Simple Sentences](#simple-sentences)
      - [Subject + Main Verb](#subject--main-verb)
    - [Sentences with Direct Objects](#sentences-with-direct-objects)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Direct Object](#subject--main-verb--direct-object)
    - [Sentences with Indirect Objects](#sentences-with-indirect-objects)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Indirect Object + Direct Object](#subject--main-verb--indirect-object--direct-object)
    - [Sentences with Modifiers](#sentences-with-modifiers)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Object + Modifier](#subject--main-verb--object--modifier)
    - [Sentences with Infinitives](#sentences-with-infinitives)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive](#subject--main-verb--infinitive)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive + Object](#subject--main-verb--infinitive--object)
    - [Modal Verbs](#modal-verbs)
      - [Subject + Modal Verb + Main Verb](#subject--modal-verb--main-verb)
      - [Subject + Modal Verb + Main Verb + Object](#subject--modal-verb--main-verb--object)
    - [Sentences with Adverbs](#sentences-with-adverbs)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Adverb](#subject--main-verb--adverb)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Object + Adverb](#subject--main-verb--object--adverb)
    - [8. Complex Sentences](#8-complex-sentences)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Direct Object + Dependent Clause](#subject--main-verb--direct-object--dependent-clause)
      - [Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive + Dependent Clause](#subject--main-verb--infinitive--dependent-clause)
    - [Compound Sentences](#compound-sentences)
      - [Independent Clause + Coordinating Conjunction + Independent Clause](#independent-clause--coordinating-conjunction--independent-clause)
  - [Subject](#subject)
  - [References:](#references)
    - [Books](#books)
    - [Websites](#websites)


# Words, Phrases & Clauses 

## Compound words

[General](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/open-and-closed-compound-words/)

[Hyphen With Compound
Modifiers](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/punctuation-capitalization/hyphen-with-compound-modifiers/)

## Signal Phrases

These are expressions that introduce direct and indirect citations come before paraphrases and quotes. ([owl.perdue](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/using_research/quoting_paraphrasing_and_summarizing/signal_and_lead_in_phrases.html))

### Uses

- Paraphrasing
- Help explain the author's purpose (like stance on a topic) through the choice of attribution verb
- Helps to prevent plagiarism

# Sentences

## Proving a sentence is grammatically correct

Proving that a sentence is grammatically correct involves checking it
against the established rules of grammar for the language in question.
Here's how you can systematically verify grammatical correctness:

-   Subject-Verb Agreement

    Ensure the subject and verb agree in number and person.

    ex: \"She runs every morning.\" (Correct: Singular subject with
    singular verb)

-   Sentence Structure

    Confirm the sentence has at least one independent clause: a subject,
    a verb, and expresses a complete thought.

    ex: \"The cat sat on the mat.\" (Subject: The cat; Verb: sat;
    Object: the mat)

-   Punctuation

    Check for proper punctuation, including periods, commas, colons, and
    semicolons.

    ex: \"Let's eat, Grandma!\" vs. \"Let's eat Grandma!\" (The comma
    changes the meaning.)

-   Word Order

    Verify that the sentence follows the typical word order for the
    language (e.g., Subject-Verb-Object in English).

    ex: \"I ate the cake.\" (Correct word order)

-   Consistency in Tense

    Ensure the verb tenses are consistent unless a change in tense is
    required by the context.

    ex: \"She was reading when he called.\" (Past continuous for an
    ongoing action and simple past for an interruption)

-   Modifiers

    Check that modifiers are placed close to the word they modify to
    avoid confusion or ambiguity.

    ex: \"The boy who was crying loudly left the room.\" (Correct
    modifier placement)

-   Prepositions

    Ensure prepositions are used correctly based on the context.

    ex: \"She is good at math.\" (Correct use of \"at\")

-   Parallelism

    Look for parallel structure in lists or comparisons.

    ex: \"She likes swimming, running, and hiking.\" (Consistent gerund
    forms)

-   Articles and Determiners

    Check that articles (a, an, the) and determiners (this, that, these)
    are used appropriately.

    ex: \"A cat is on the roof.\" (Correct use of \"a\" with a singular
    noun)

-   Pronouns and Antecedents

    Verify that pronouns clearly refer to their antecedents and agree in
    number and gender.

    ex: \"Each student must bring their own pencil.\" (Correct: \"Each\"
    is singular, but \"their\" is accepted in modern English)

By systematically evaluating the sentence against these rules, you can
determine if it is grammatically correct. If you're unsure about a
specific sentence, feel free to share it, and I can help analyze it!

## Specific elements of sentences

A sentences is a group of words with a subject and predicat and
expresses a complete thought. That sounds similar to clauses. But that's
incorrect. \"and expresses a complete thought\" is a difference and a
sentence at minimum is in the form of a clause but can contain multiple
clauses as long as it has a subject and a predicate.

### Phrases

A phrase is a group of words which contains neither a subject nor a
verb. (It may, however, contain a verbal form such as an infinitive, a
participle, or a gerund.)

### Clauses

It is below the sentence in rank and in traditional grammar said to
consist of a subject and predicate. There are two kinds of clauses:
independent and dependent.

### Predicate

The part of a sentence or clause containing a verb and stating something
about the subject

### Subject Complements

A subject complement is a word or phrase that appears after a linking
verb in a sentence and is closely related to the sentence's
subject---identifying, defining, or describing it.

A subject complement's job, along with a linking verb, is to clarify the
subject of a sentence.

Subject complements never appear without linking verbs, and linking
verbs never appear without
them.**[\[ref\]](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/subject-complement/)**

#### Object

Direct object: The noun that receives the action.

Indirect object: The noun that receives the direct object.

## Forms

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/sentences/sentence-structure/>

-   Simple sentences: 1 independent clause

-   Compound sentences: 2 or more independent clauses

-   Complex sentences:1 independent clause + 1 or more subordinate
    clauses

-   Compound-Complex sentences: 2 or more independent clauses + 1 or
    more subordinate clauses

## Types

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/sentences/kinds-of-sentences/>

-   declarative

-   interrogative

-   imperative Single word sentences are possible

-   exclamatory

## Phrases

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/sentences/phrases/>

Phrases are of 2 kind: grammatical phrases and common phrases

### Grammatical Phrases

A grammatical phrase is a collection of words working together as a
unit.

A grammatical phrase can clarify any part of speech---the key here is
that all a phrase does is provide some detail;

#### Appositive phrases

An appositive is a noun phrase that comes after another noun phrase (its
antecedent) to provide extra information about it. ex: \"The student,
Fairoos, is writing a latex file\"

### Common Phrases

Common phrases, are pieces of figurative language that rely on the
listener's familiarity with them to be understood

Here:

-   Appositive: Fairoos

-   Antecedant: The student

## Clauses

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/clauses/>

Every sentence you write includes at least one independent clause

## Structure

     Subject + Phrase
  -----------------------
   Subject + Verb-phrase

#### Basic Rules

-   Capitalize the first letter of the first word in a sentence.

-   End a sentence with a period, question mark, exclamation point, or
    quotation marks.

-   Most of the time, the subject of the sentence comes first, the verb
    comes second, and the objects come last. (Subject -\> Verb -\>
    Object)

-   If the subject is singular, the verb must also be singular. If the
    subject is plural, the verb must be plural. This is known as
    subject-verb agreement.

## Punctuation

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/punctuation-capitalization/punctuation/>

### Period

Use: to end a declarative sentence.

### Comma

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/punctuation-capitalization/comma/>

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/punctuation-capitalization/comma-before-and/>

Uses:

-   indicates a pause in a sentence, either between phrases, clauses, or
    items in a list

the points where you'd pause in a spoken sentence aren't always where
you'd use a comma in a written sentence.

### Apostrophe (')

Uses:

-   Creating possessive nouns

-   Combining words into contractions

-   more casually, apostrophes are used to shorten words (government
    becomes gov't and the 1970s becomes the '70s)

-   in quotes to show the speaker has shortened a word, for example:
    nothin'.

-   only time an apostrophe is used to pluralize a noun is when the noun
    being pluralized is a lowercase letter. For example: Mind your p's
    and q's.

Don'ts:

-   Most of the time, they are not used to pluralize nouns

-   use them when you're referring to a decade numerically (correct: the
    1990s, incorrect: the 1990's)

-   use them when the last letter follows an apostrophe (correct:
    don'ts, incorrect: don't's)

-   use them when describing a group of people (correct: the Chens are
    coming to dinner, incorrect: the Chen's are coming to dinner)

### Ellipses (. . .)

Use:

-   to show that information has been omitted from a quote, usually to
    shorten it

-   they're also used to build suspense

-   show a speaker's voice is trailing off or faltering

-   represent incomplete thoughts

-   to indicate pauses

-   voices or thoughts fading away

-   Emotion of speechlessness

## Proofreading

<https://grammarist.com/editing/what-is-proofreading/>

### Tips

-   Make a list of your personal bugaboos.

-   Read it. Wait a minute. Then read it again.

-   Read backward.

-   Change the view.

-   Read it out loud

## Subject & Object

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/parts-of-speech/the-basics-on-subject-and-object-pronouns-b/>

## Subject-Verb Agreement

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/grammar-basics-what-is-subject-verb-agreement/>

## Grammatical Structures in English

In English, various grammatical structures are used to form different
types of sentences. Here are some common structures:

### Simple Sentences

#### Subject + Main Verb

This is the most basic sentence structure, where the subject is followed
by the main verb.

-   Example: *She runs.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb].`

### Sentences with Direct Objects

#### Subject + Main Verb + Direct Object

This structure includes a subject, a main verb, and a direct object.

-   Example: *She reads a book.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Direct Object].`

### Sentences with Indirect Objects

#### Subject + Main Verb + Indirect Object + Direct Object

Here, the sentence has a subject, a main verb, an indirect object, and a
direct object.

-   Example: *She gives him a gift.*

-   Structure:
    `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Indirect Object] + [Direct Object].`

### Sentences with Modifiers

#### Subject + Main Verb + Object + Modifier

This structure includes a subject, main verb, object, and a modifier
(which can be an adjective or adverb).

-   Example: *She reads the book quickly.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Object] + [Modifier].`

### Sentences with Infinitives

#### Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive

In this structure, the verb is followed by an infinitive verb phrase
(to + verb).

-   Example: *She wants to study.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Infinitive].`

#### Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive + Object

This structure includes an infinitive verb followed by an object.

-   Example: *She wants to eat dinner.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Infinitive] + [Object].`

### Modal Verbs

#### Subject + Modal Verb + Main Verb

This structure uses a modal verb (can, should, might, etc.) followed by
the main verb in its base form.

-   Example: *She can run.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Modal Verb] + [Main Verb].`

#### Subject + Modal Verb + Main Verb + Object

Here, a modal verb is used with the main verb and an object.

-   Example: *She can read a book.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Modal Verb] + [Main Verb] + [Object].`

### Sentences with Adverbs

#### Subject + Main Verb + Adverb

In this structure, an adverb modifies the main verb or the entire
sentence.

-   Example: *She runs quickly.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Adverb].`

#### Subject + Main Verb + Object + Adverb

Here, the adverb modifies either the object or the verb in the sentence.

-   Example: *She reads the book slowly.*

-   Structure: `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Object] + [Adverb].`

### 8. Complex Sentences

#### Subject + Main Verb + Direct Object + Dependent Clause

In complex sentences, a dependent clause follows the main clause.

-   Example: *She reads because she enjoys it.*

-   Structure:
    `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Direct Object] + [Dependent Clause].`

#### Subject + Main Verb + Infinitive + Dependent Clause

Here, the infinitive is followed by a dependent clause.

-   Example: *She wants to study because she loves learning.*

-   Structure:
    `[Subject] + [Main Verb] + [Infinitive] + [Dependent Clause].`

### Compound Sentences

#### Independent Clause + Coordinating Conjunction + Independent Clause

A compound sentence consists of two independent clauses joined by a
coordinating conjunction.

-   Example: *She reads, and he writes.*

-   Structure:
    `[Independent Clause] + [Coordinating Conjunction] + [Independent Clause].`

## Subject

<https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/compound-subject/>

## References:

### Books

[English in Use](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/English_in_Use)

### Websites

- Grammarly
- owl perdue edu 

